Add ADR outlining rationale for libcprover-cpp and goto-bmc integration (#7778)
diffblue/cbmc: doc/ADR/cpp_api_modularisation.md

\page cpp-api-and-modularisation Libcprover-cpp and Modularisation

**Date**: 22 Jun 2023
**Updated**: 22 Jun 2023
**Author**: Fotis Koutoulakis, fotis.koutoulakis@diffblue.com
**Domain**: Architecture, API
**Description**: This document outlines our thinking about the rearchitecting of

>     CBMC using the C++ API (`Libcprover-cpp`) as the central module and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    CBMC using the C++ API (`libcprover-cpp`) as the central module and the
```

    transitioning of other tools to use that as a basis.

## Motivation && Current State of Affairs

> CProver is a collection of tools fitting various program analysis needs. It

Reviewer 2: It -> CProver

has been the product of the evolution of the codebase of the model-checking

> tool for C (`CBMC`), after it has been adopted with various front-ends/back-ends

Reviewer 2: ", after it" -> ". Since then CProver"
adopted -> adapted

> and various auxilliary tools.

Reviewer 2: remove various here, it's already in the previous line

During this time, the repository has grown organically, using some guidelines
for development that were based on tradition and intuition rather than some

> tight development guide. This development model has been successful for most

Reviewer 2: "tight development guide" -> "agreed architectural approach"
This may not be the best choice either, but we want to be clear that there has not been a formal/agreed way to developer CProver and how to write code and use structures/modules within the codebase.

of CProver's life, based on its nature as a hybrid industrial/academic and

> experimental/applied tool. However, it has had the side-effect of accruing

Reviewer 2: it -> this

some code duplication and technical debt. It has also made the codebase harder
to understand/develop and integrate with, especially for someone who is new

> to the codebase.

Reviewer 2: "It ..." Propose to rephrase to: "Consequently the codebase is complex and difficult to understand and developer for. This is a large barrier to new developers, new features, and also improving and fixing the existing CProver tools."

The above concerns have generated discussions about the breaking down of
CProver into modules, with cleaner interfaces and tighter boundary control
between them, making the code easier to integrate in other projects (by making
the various component modules easier to combine and reuse) and making the
codebase easier to understand and maintain.

> 

Reviewer 2: Missing comment here that there is also a desire to separate functionality into different tools in the CProver suite. This would remove duplication and bloat, and also prevent issues like where the same option behaves differently in different CProver tools.

## The Plan Going Forward

Given the above outline, we have reached a point where we are strongly motivated

> to take action to better componentise and modularise CProver.

Reviewer 3: What do we mean by componentise / modularise here? They could have many different technical interpretations, therefore I think we need to give specific technical definitions of the goals we want to achieve. For example providing separate command line utilities with separate user interfaces for separate stages in an analysis pipeline would better support users who wish to develop and substitute cprover components. Another form of modularisation could involve defining which headers form part of an external or internal interface. That way a library packaged with the public headers only, would be sufficient to build an external user interface whether graphical or command line. I am not suggesting that we make the definitions of these terms either of the examples I have provided. But I think that we should define them in order to properly express our intent.

Author: I've added something to better explain what I mean by `better componentise/modularise`.

> It's also an opportune time for us, given the existence of `Libcprover-cpp`

Reviewer 3: Have we defined the architectural design goals for `Libcprover-cpp` anywhere? For example if this is for use in interfacing to the cprover code base from "foreign" languages; are there specific C++ features which should be excluded from use in its "public" headers? I am specifically thinking about the use of language features which may pose calling convention headaches such as exceptions, virtual function calls, overloading; or language features in headers which are understood by C++ compilers, but not C compilers such as templates for example.

Author: We do not have such a document in place (yet).

the C++ API that we built to support interfacing with Rust (for now - other
languages may be coming in the future): we can use this as the basis of
development for an API exposing the interfaces of the various other modules
and refactor them into the better-defined shape we want them to take on
an incremental basis.

Of course, this is a project that is massive in scope, potentially being
exposed to further scope creep. We acknowledge that any effort to do what
we have discussed already is going to be a multi-year effort from our end,
and that we will need community alignment to achieve the outcome we're
looking for.

This is why we are looking into testing the approach on a smaller component
first, to get a better feel for the amount of effort and any challenges
lurking in the dark.

> ## `goto-bmc` and `libcprover-cpp`

Reviewer 3: There is a fairly straight forward implication in the architecture here, which is not yet explicitly discussed in this document. This is that if `goto-bmc` is written using the `libcprover-cpp` interface only, then as a necessity it will not be following precisely the same code-patterns as the other command line tools due to the differing implementation choice. Should we include a statement of intent in this document for the future of the existing user interfaces, in order to achieve consistency in the long term?

Author: Yeah I added a paragraph making this explicit.

One of the objectives of our modularisation efforts is to decouple the
various components `CBMC` is based on (front-ends, backends, etc) to allow
for reuse/recombination. As a first segue into the larger effort, we wanted
a tool focusing only on running symex (the backend of our analysis engine)

> on a GOTO-binary that has been preprocessed into an appropriate form.

Reviewer 2: I think you mean doing symex and verification here.

We took the first steps for that in [cbmc#7762](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/pull/7762).

The aim of the PR was not only to allow for the tool with the narrower-scope
to come to life, but also to see if we could expose just enough of the
process to the C++ API and use that as the basis of the new tool.

> This whole process has been very informational: we found out that not only

Reviewer 3: (informational) -> (informative)

we *can* use the C++ API in that capacity, but also that extending the API
as and when we need to, and doing the various refactorings to the other tools
on a Just-In-Time basis is viable.

There have been, however, some limitations:

* The C++ API is still nascent, and as such its support for various workflows

>   is just not present (at first). We can (and do) build things fast, as and

Reviewer 2: (at first) -> (yet)

  when we need them - but it's nowhere near feature complete to provide for
  all of a user's workflows at the time of this writing.

* CProver tools have primarily been based on textual output to report on the
  results of their function (be it analysis, or transformations, etc). This
  hasn't been a problem up until this point (with the caveat that occassionally
  requests for support of new textual formats come up and adding support for
  those has become a laborious process).

  There's a need however for the separation of concerns between the production
  of the results by the analysis engine and the presentation layer for those.

> 

Reviewer: I suggest to mention the almost non-existent option support as a limitation.

Reviewer: @NlightNFotis This has not been addressed

Author: I'm not sure this is a good idea - my understanding is that this is a temporary limitation. It's not likely to outlive this document, and if we add it now on the basis that we remove this later, we will most likely forget.

We're working towards addressing these teething problems, but while we're
still operating on those, we have to accept some compromises in the architecture
of the code while we're iterating or stabilising several of the new or
refactored parts.

Be advised that some constructs may pop up in some limited locations
in the codebase that may appear questionable. We're only asking for
some patience while we're working out the best way to refactor them into
an architecture that is more cohesive with the long term vision for the

> platform.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should add a promise here that when we make these kinds of "questionable" changes, we mark them in the code?

of CProver's life, based on its nature as a hybrid industrial/academic and
experimental/applied tool. However, this has had the side-effect of accruing
some code duplication and technical debt. Consequently, the codebase is complex
and difficult to understand and develop for. This is a large barrier to new
developers, new features, and also improving and fixing the existing CProver
tools.

The above concerns have generated discussions about the breaking down of
CProver into modules, with cleaner interfaces and tighter boundary control
between them, making the code easier to integrate in other projects (by making
the various component modules easier to combine and reuse) and making the
codebase easier to understand and maintain.

The desire to separate functionality into different functional units
would also remove duplication and bloat, and prevent issues with the
same flag behaving in different ways across CProver tools.

## The Plan Going Forward

Given the above outline, we have reached a point where we are strongly motivated
to take action to better componentise and modularise CProver. What we mean by
"better componentise and modularise" is that right now, even though there

> exists some structure between different CBMC components (say, what's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exists some structure between different CBMC components (say, what is
```

Author: I can't commit that - it contains a typo.

falling under the `src/goto-programs/` or `src/util/` folders), right now

> the various components aren't designed to demonstrate loose coupling, with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the various components are not designed to demonstrate loose coupling, with
```

some of them being co-dependent in terms of concerns, which hinders their

> reusability and understandability.

Reviewer: I struggle to understand what do you mean here

> It's also an opportune time for us, given the existence of `libcprover-cpp`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also an opportune time for us, given the existence of `libcprover-cpp`
```

> the C++ API that we built to support interfacing with Rust (for now - other
> languages may be coming in the future): we can use this as the basis of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we can use this as the basis of
```

There is no need to explain why `libcprover-cpp` exists.

development for an API exposing the interfaces of the various other modules
and refactor them into the better-defined shape we want them to take on
an incremental basis.

Of course, this is a project that is massive in scope, potentially being
exposed to further scope creep. We acknowledge that any effort to do what
we have discussed already is going to be a multi-year effort from our end,

> and that we will need community alignment to achieve the outcome we're

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and that we will need community alignment to achieve the outcome we are
```

lurking in the dark.

## `goto-bmc` and `libcprover-cpp`

One of the objectives of our modularisation efforts is to decouple the
various components `CBMC` is based on (front-ends, backends, etc) to allow
for reuse/recombination. As a first segue into the larger effort, we wanted
a tool focusing only on running symex (the backend of our analysis engine)
on a GOTO-binary that has been preprocessed into an appropriate form.

We took the first steps for that in [cbmc#7762](https://github.com/diffblue/cbmc/pull/7762).

The aim of the PR was not only to allow for the tool with the narrower-scope
to come to life, but also to see if we could expose just enough of the
process to the C++ API and use that as the basis of the new tool.

This whole process has been very informative: we found out that not only
we *can* use the C++ API in that capacity, but also that extending the API
as and when we need to, and doing the various refactorings to the other tools
on a Just-In-Time basis is viable.

There have been, however, some limitations:

* The C++ API is still nascent, and as such its support for various workflows
  is just not present (yet). We can (and do) build things fast, as and

>   when we need them - but it's nowhere near feature complete to provide for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  when we need them - but it is nowhere near feature complete to provide for
```

  all of a user's workflows at the time of this writing.

* Still on the C++ API, its usage as the implementation basis for the new
  tool `goto-bmc` means that the code-structure and patterns in `goto-bmc`

>   are going to differ from other existing tools in the CProver-suite.

Reviewer: ⛏️ Not so much to be fair

* CProver tools have primarily been based on textual output to report on the
  results of their function (be it analysis, or transformations, etc). This

>   hasn't been a problem up until this point (with the caveat that occassionally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  has not been a problem up until this point (with the caveat that occasionally
```

  requests for support of new textual formats come up and adding support for
  those has become a laborious process).

>   There's a need however for the separation of concerns between the production

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  There is a need however for the separation of concerns between the production
```

  of the results by the analysis engine and the presentation layer for those.

> We're working towards addressing these teething problems, but while we're

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are working towards addressing these teething problems, but while we are
```

still operating on those, we have to accept some compromises in the architecture

> of the code while we're iterating or stabilising several of the new or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the code while we are iterating or stabilising several of the new or
```

refactored parts.

Be advised that some constructs may pop up in some limited locations

> in the codebase that may appear questionable. We're only asking for
> some patience while we're working out the best way to refactor them into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the codebase that may appear questionable. We are only asking for
some patience while we are working out the best way to refactor them into
```

an architecture that is more cohesive with the long term vision for the
platform.

From our end, we will do our best to avoid any spillover effects to
other areas of the codebase, and to avoid introducing any behavioural

> regressions while we're implementing the above plan. Any constructs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
regressions while we are implementing the above plan. Any constructs
```
